.\" $Id: classes.1,v 1.1.1.1 2020/05/16 02:37:00 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2014-2015 Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

.TH CLASSES 1 "2016-05-14"
.SH NAME
classes \- List the Ctalk classes for a system and a user.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B classes
[
.B -h | --help
] [
.B -q
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Classes
lists the classes present on a machine, both in Ctalk's 
system-wide class directory(s), and in any directories named by
the
.B CLASSLIBDIRS
environment variable.  Refer to the section,
.B ENVIRONMENT,
below.

If the class directories contain files that declare classes
with duplicate names, the
.B classes
program lists only the first file it encounters.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -h
Display a help message and exit.  Also lists the directories that
Ctalk searches for its class libraries.
.TP 8
.B --help
The same as 
.B -h.
.TP 8
.B -q
Don't print dots to indicate the program's progress.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B Classes, 
like
.B Ctalk,
uses the value of 
.B CLASSLIBDIRS
to add additional directories to
its class search path.  
.B CLASSLIBDIRS's
value is a colon
separated list of directories, similar to the format of the
.B PATH
environment variable; i.e., 
\fI<dir1>\fP:\fI<dir2>\fP:\fI<dir3>.\fP

.SH BUGS
.B Classes,
in order to be as fast as possible, only parses class declarations 
that appear on one line; e.g.:

  <superclassname> class <classname>;

If the class declaration includes a documentation string, however, the
documentation string may appear on separate lines, since
.B classes
doesn't parse it.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR classdoc "(1)",
.BR ctalk "(1)",
.BR methods "(1)",
.BR methodsource "(1)".

The Texinfo documentation also describes the
.B Ctalk
tools.  The shell command

  $ info ctalktools

displays the documentation on machines that have
GNU Texinfo installed.

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctalk 
and
.B classes
are written and maintained by Robert Kiesling,
.br
rk3314042@gmail.com.  The latest 
.B Ctalk
release and programs written in
.B Ctalk
are available at
http://sf.net/projects/ctalk/.

