.\" $Id: classdoc.1,v 1.1.1.1 2019/10/26 23:40:51 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2015 Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

.TH CLASSDOC 1 "2015-09-17"
.SH NAME
classdoc \- Display a Ctalk class's documentation string.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B classdoc [
.B -h
] | [
.B -f
] [
.B -s
] [
.B -v
] [
.B -V
] \fIclassname\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Classdoc
displays the documentation string of the class given as its argument, if
the class provides one.source code of the method named on the command line.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -f
Print the class file's path name.
.TP 8
.B -h
Print a help message and exit.
.TP 8
.B -s
Print the classes' superclass.
.TP 8
.B -v
Print the classes' superclass, file path, and doc string.
.TP 8
.B -V
The same as
.B -v,
with labels for the superclass and path fields.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B Classdoc,
like
.B Ctalk,
uses the value of 
.B CLASSLIBDIRS
to add additional directories to
its class search path.  
.B CLASSLIBDIRS's
value is a colon
separated list of directories; i.e., 
\fI<dir1>\fP:\fI<dir2>\fP:\fI<dir3>.\fP

.SH BUGS
Doesn't print a superclass or documentation string for
.B Object
class, because, as the top-level, default class, the
.B Object
class file itself doesn't contain a class declaration.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ctalk "(1)",
.BR classes "(1)",
.BR membervars "(1)",
.BR methods "(1)",
.BR methodsource "(1)".

The Texinfo documentation also describes the
.B Ctalk
tools.  The shell command

  $ info ctalktools

displays the documentation on machines that have
GNU Texinfo installed.

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctalk 
and
.B methodsource
are written and maintained by Robert Kiesling,
.br
rk3314042@gmail.com.   The Web site
http://sf.net/projects/ctalk
contains information about current releases.

