.\" $Id: ctalkmethods.1,v 1.9 2019/11/23 19:45:16 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2019 Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.\" Macros from Perl's pod2man preamble
.de Vb \" Begin verbatim text
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve \" End verbatim text
.ft R
.fi
..

.TH CTALKMETHODS 1 "2019-11-20"
.SH NAME
ctalkmethods \- How to use objects in Ctalk methods.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page describes some of the language features
that
.B Ctalk
provides to work with objects when writing methods.  Many of
these features also work within C functions.  It also provides
an overview of how methods interact with
.B Ctalk's
internal structures, and how to debug methods at the C source
code level using a debugger like
.BR gdb "(1)."

.SS A Little About Methods

Methods in
.B Ctalk
are similar to C functions, but they have a couple of significant additions.

.Vb 4
\&     - They are grouped by class, which means that any class can
\&       have its own version of a method.  This also means that methods
\&       can be inherited from a classes' superclass.
\&     - Methods can overload math operators and parameter lists.
.Ve

\fIThe Ctalk Tutorial\fP contains an introduction which describes how
methods use these features to work with objects within a class
hierarchy.

From the perspective of writing methods, though, it is important to
remember that methods are translated directly into the C functions
which comprise the executable program (with the exception of the
function \fImain\fP).

For details about how method receivers, selectors, and parameter lists
get translated into functions, refer to the section, TRANSLATING
METHOD NAMES TO FUNCTION NAMES, below.

.SH THE METHOD API'S

In general,
.B Ctalk
provides both a high level set of
.B Ctalk
statements, and a low level, C language interface to work with objects
and C variables.  In some cases, the two are interchangeable, and in
some cases
.B Ctalk
can use both application programming interfaces in the same
expression.

In order to make this clearer, here are two example methods. One
of them uses the
.B Ctalk
language, and the other uses the C library API.  However, these two
methods function similarly.

This method is written completely in
.B Ctalk.

.Vb 4
\&    Integer instanceMethod + add (Magnitude i) {
\&      "Return the sum of the receiver and the argument."
\&      if (i is Integer) {
\&        return self + i;
\&      } else {
\&        return self + i asInteger;
\&      }
\&    }
.Ve

The following example shows the method translated into
.B Ctalk's
low-level C API, which can use the C addition operator
directly.

.Vb 4
\&    Integer instanceMethod + add (Magnitude i) {
\&      "Return the sum of the receiver and argument."
\&
\&      int a, result;
\&
\&      if (i is Integer) {
\&        return INTVAL(__ctalk_self_internal_value () -> __o_value)
\&          + INTVAL(ARG(0) -> __o_value);
\&      } else {
\&        a = i asInteger;
\&        result = INTVAL(__ctalk_self_internal_value () -> __o_value)
\&          + a;
\&        return result;
\&      }
\&    }
.Ve

.B Ctalk
is still a work in progress.  There could be many tasks for which you
might want to use the
.B Ctalk
library functions directly.  The second example is actually the
.B Ctalk
compiler's translation from higher level
.B Ctalk
expressions into C code.  This, incidentally is how programs can use,
for example, addition (the + C operator), in a method that is bound to
the addition operator in higher level expressions, line the first
example above.

The following
sections describe
.B Ctalk's
C language Application Programming Interface.

The following sections describe each of these language features in
more detail.

.SH HIGH LEVEL API

The high-level API should appear straightforward.  The only
issue that is worth noting is that the class of the method's
parameter, \fIMagnitude,\fP is different than the class of
receiver, which is \fIInteger.\fP  In this case,
.B Ctalk
prints a warning, and continues compiling the method.

.in +5
mapi3.c:6: in method, Integer : myAdd:
.br
mapi3.c:6: Warning: Operand class, "Magnitude," is different than receiver class, "Integer."
.br
mapi3.c:6: in method, Integer : myAdd:
.br
mapi3.c:6: Warning: The method should perform the necessary class conversion(s) to the receiver's class.
.br
mapi3.c:8: in method, Integer : myAdd:
.br
mapi3.c:8: Warning: Operand class, "Magnitude," is different than receiver class, "Integer."
.br
mapi3.c:8: in method, Integer : myAdd:
.br
mapi3.c:8: Warning: The method should perform the necessary class conversion(s) to the receiver's class.
.in -5

.B Ctalk
doesn't exit with an error, but the compiler treats the mismatch as
being resolvable when the program runs; that is, it's up to the
programmer to make sure that the necessary conversion(s) are present
in the method.

If the compiler can't set the operand's type directly, as in this
case, it uses \fIInteger\fP as the default class of the operand.  The
compiler then defers the conversion of the actual numeric types until
run time.

The source file name, \fImapi3.c,\fP by the way, is the file name of
the example method above in the \fItest/expect\fP subdirectory.

.B Ctalk
translates C data types to the corresponding class in parameter lists
if they're present.  For example, this method declares the parameter
\fIf\fP using the C type \fIdouble.\fP

.in +5
Float instanceMethod + add (double f) {
.br
  "Return the sum of the receiver and the argument."
.br

  if (f is Float) {
.br
    return self + f;
.br
  } else {
.br
    return self + f asFloat;
.br
  }
.br
}
.in -5

Compiling this method doesn't produce a warning, because
the C type \fIdouble\fP translates directly into
.B Ctalk's
\fIFloat\fP class.

Many of 
.B Ctalk's
base classes correspond directly to basic C types.  They
are shown here.

.in +5
          C Type           Ctalk Class
.br	  
          ------           -----------
.br	  
          int              Integer
.br	  
          long long int    LongInteger
.br
          double           Float
.br	  
          bool             Boolean
.br	  
          char             Character
.br	  
          char *           String
.br
          void *           Symbol

.in -5

Also, the type of warning shown above only applies to methods that
overload math operators, where a program needs to deal with specific
numeric types. These expressions can also use pointers and aggregate
types that can be expressed as a basic type, like ints and long ints,
even though programs that add pointers generally follow the semantics
of pointer math.

As an aid to debugging,
.B Ctalk
provides the \fIObjectInspector\fP class to view object's values
when a program is run.  Refer to the
.BR inspect "(3ctalk)"
manual page.

.SH CONSTRUCTORS

Like many other object oriented languages,
.B Ctalk
uses \fIconstructor methods\fP\(emthe method \fInew\fP\(emwhen
declaring objects.  For example:

.Vb 4
\&    Integer new myInt;
.Ve

Declarations can construct multiple objects.

.Vb 4
\&    String new mySubStr1, mySubStr2;
.Ve

In each case, the statements create the new objects, and add any instance
variables that the class and its superclasses declare to the new objects.

There is another type of constructor method, which uses the selector
\fIbasicNew,\fP to construct objects on the fly.  The \fIbasicNew\fP
constructors are needed when constructing collections of objects, like
\fILists\fP and \fIAssociativeArrays,\fP whose size isn't known
beforehand.

Programs that use the class \fITreeNode,\fP for example, use
\fIbasicNew\fP methods when constructing its member lists.  Here's an
example, from the class, \fIClassLibraryTree,\fP which constructs a
list of subnodes on the fly.

.Vb 4
\&    TreeNode instanceMethod addSubClasses (AssociativeArray subclassesArg) {
\&      "Called recursively to add classes to the tree after a
\&       node's parent has been added."
\&      Symbol new superclassPtr;
\&      TreeNode new node;
\&      TreeNode new tree;
\&      AssociativeArray new subclasses;
\&      String new superclassName;
\&      String new superclassLabel;
\&    
\&      if (subclassesArg size <= 1)
\&        return NULL;
\&    
\&      tree = self;
\&    
\&      subclassesArg mapKeys {
\&        tree search *self;
\&        *superclassPtr = tree searchResult;
\&        if (*superclassPtr) {
\&          node = TreeNode basicNew self name, self name;
\&          node setContent self name;
\&          (*superclassPtr) addChild node;
\&        } else {
\&          superclassName = String basicNew (*self), (*self);
\&          subclasses atPut (self name), superclassName;
\&        }
\&      }
\&    
\&      eval tree addSubClasses subclasses;
\&    }
.Ve

The method is called recursively for each set of subclasses that haven't been added below a particular superclass (the object \fIsuperclassPtr).

The \fIbasicNew\fP methods are declared in \fIObject\fP and
\fIVector\fP classes.  Typing the command,

.Vb 4
\&    $ methodsource Object basicNew
.Ve

displays the \fIbasicNew\fP methods declared in \fIObject\fP class.
There are several of them, depending on how many arguments it's necessary
to give when creating the new objects.

For some reference, Here's the source of the 2-argument version of
\fIbasicNew.\fP The method is written mainly in C.  The basics of the
C language API are discussed below.  The functions that the method
uses are described in the \fICtalk Language Reference.\fP

.Vb 4
\&    Object instanceMethod basicNew (char *name, char *value_expr) {
\&      "Return a new object with the name and value given by
\&      the arguments.  The new object has all of the
\&      instance variables defined by the class object.  Also
\&      set the object's value explicitly to make sure that
\&      an instance variable didn't replace it.  The new
\&      object has the scope LOCAL_VAR and has a reference
\&      count of 1."
\&      Exception new ex;
\&      OBJECT *s;
\&      returnObjectClass Any;
\&    
\&      if (self className != "Class") {
\&        ex raiseException INVALID_RECEIVER_X, "\"basicNew\" with 2 arguments requires a class object as the receiver.";
\&          return NULL;
\&      }
\&      
\&    
\&      s = __ctalkCreateObjectInit (name, self name, 
\&                                   self superclassName,
\&                                   LOCAL_VAR, value_expr);
\&    
\&      __ctalkInstanceVarsFromClassObject (s);
\&      __ctalkAddBasicNewTag (s);
\&      __objRefCntSet (&s, 1);
\&    
\&      return s;
\&    }
.Ve




.SH TRANSLATING BETWEEN CTALK AND C

In most cases, you can assign
.B Ctalk
objects to C variables and vice versa.  Here are a few examples.

.in +5
int int_a;
.br
Integer new myObj;


myObj = int_a;
.in -5

or,

.in +5
int_a = myObj;
.in -5

You can also use objects as parameters to C library functions,
or to assign a function's return value, or as a function argument.

.in +5

myObj = strlen ("Hello, world!");

.in -5
or,
.in +5

myObj = strlen (myString);

.in -5

You can also use C variables as method receivers and arguments.

.in +5
int my_int;
.br
char str[25], *s;

strcpy (str, "1234");
.br
s = str;
.br
my_int = s asInteger;
.br
printf ("%d\\n", my_int);
.in -5
or,
.in +5
int my_int;
.br
char c;

c = 65;

my_int = ++c asInteger;
.br
printf ("%d\\n", my_int);
.in -5

or, as another example,

.in +5
int i_term;
.br
Array new myArray;

i_term = 0;
.br
myArray atPut i_term, "Element at 0";

i_term = 1;
.br
myArray atPut (i_term, "Element at 1");
.in -5

.SH TEMPLATES

When
.B Ctalk
encounters a C function in an expression, it can substitute a 
method that performs the same operation.  These functions are called
.B Templates.  Ctalk
provides templates for many of the C library's functions, like
\fIatoi(3)\fP or \fIstrcpy(3).\fP
.B Ctalk
also allows you to add templates to the class library.

Templates provide a way for programs to use C library functions in
expressions with a linkage to the class library.  To make this clear,
consider the following expression:

.in +5
if ((myInt = atoi ("2")) == 2) {
.br
\fI...program statements...\fP
.br
}
.in -5

.B Ctalk
translates the \fIif\fP predicate into the following expression.

.in +5
__ctalkEvalExpr("(myInt = CFunction cAtoi (\\"2\\")) == 2")
.in -5

Instead of calling \fIatoi(3)\fP directly,
.B Ctalk
inserts a reference to the method \fIcAtoi.\fP  This method,
like all templates, is a class method in the
.B CFunction
class.

Then
.B Ctalk
inserts the body of the template after the function or method
where the function name appears.  This is the definition of the
\fIcAtoi\fP template.

.in +5
#define atoi \\n\\
.br
cAtoi (void *s) { \\n\\
.br
  char buf[MAXLABEL]; \\n\\
.br  
  if (__ctalkIsObject (ARG(0))) \\n\\
.br  
    sprintf (buf, "%d", atoi (__ctalk_to_c_char_ptr (ARG(0))));\\n\\
.br    
  else \\n\\
.br  
    sprintf (buf, "%d", atoi ((char *)ARG(0))); \\n\\
.br    
  return __ctalkCreateObjectInit ("result", "Integer", \\n\\
.br  
				     "Magnitude", LOCAL_VAR, buf); \\n\\
.br				     
}
.in -5

The format of templates is designed to make them easy to preprocess
and insert directly into the output of a
.B Ctalk
program.

The templates are preprocessed and added to the program only when the
C function appears in a context that requires evaluation of the entire
expression at run time, and the templates' preprocessing and
evaluation occur after the body of the program and its include files
have been preprocessed.

One important point to mention right now is that the parameter list
isn't used - the parameter list is there so the template can use
basically the same prototype as the function it's replacing during
compilation.  Templates, however, get their arguments from
.B Ctalk's
argument stack, which is discussed in detail below.

Like the names of all C library templates, the \fIcAtoi\fP method's
name is constructed by capitalizing the first letter of the C library
function name and prepending the letter 'c' to it.

.B Ctalk
maintains a registry of templates. The manual pages
.BR templates "(5ctalk)"
and
.BR fnnames "(5ctalk)"
manual pages provide information about the formats of these files. The
.BR template "(1)"
program adds functions to
.B Ctalk's
template registry.

There are other times when
.B Ctalk
uses templates instead of calling functions directly.  Among those are
expressions where you want to write to objects that are used with C
functions, for example,
.BR strcat "(1)".
An expression like the following would not work, because it only reads
the objects given as the arguments.

\&  atoi (myStrObj);

This is normally okay, when we just want a C function to return a
value, and the program can use the C function
.BR atoi "(3)"
verbatim after translating \fImyStrObj\fP into a C \fIchar *.\fP

But in the case of a function like
.BR strcat "(3)",
we want to write the concatenated strings into the first object.  This
is where we would use a template as a wrapper to the function.  (Actually,
a program might also use \fIxstrcpy,\fP which is a wrapper for systems
like MacOS, which inserts its own function calls into the
.BR strcat "(3)"
argument list.)

The simplest way to get
.B Ctalk
to use the
.BR strcat "(3)"
template is to place it in an object expresion:

\&     myStr = strcat (mySubStr1, mySubStr2);

It's a little bit of a simplification to say that
.B Ctalk
substitutes the template function for the label \fIstrcat\fP and
wraps the entire expression in quotes.  That's because we also
want the String assignment (the '=' operator) to function 
as we expect.  But in any case, the definition of the \fIcStrcat\fP
template looks like this.

\&     #define strcat \\n\\
.br
\&     cStrcat (char *__s1, char *__s2) { \\n\\
.br
\&       int len; \\n\\
.br
\&       len = strlen (__ctalk_to_c_char_ptr(ARG(1))) + \\n\\
.br
\&                   strlen (__ctalk_to_c_char_ptr(ARG(0))); \\n\\
.br
\&       if (IS_OBJECT(ARG(1) -> instancevars)) \\n\\
.br
\&         __xrealloc ((void **)&(ARG(1) -> instancevars -> __o_value), len);\\n\\
.br
\&       __xrealloc ((void **)&(ARG(1) -> __o_value), len); \\n\\
.br
\&       if (__ctalkIsObject (ARG(0))) \\n\\
.br
\&         strcat (__ctalk_to_c_char_ptr(ARG(1)), \\n\\
.br
\&                 __ctalk_to_c_char_ptr (ARG(0))); \\n\\
.br
\&     return ARG(1);\\n\\
.br
\&     }

If we simply use the function on its own, like this:

\&     strcat (mySubStr1, mySubStr2);

Then
.B Ctalk
compiles the expression into this:

\&     __ctalkEvalExpr("CFunction cStrcat (mySubStr1, mySubStr2)");

So the
.B Ctalk
run time library can evaluate and execute the expression with the
objects that are \fIstrcpy's\fP arguments.

.SS  Wrapper Functions

In the class libraries,
.B Ctalk
uses wrapper functions for common C library functions.  These
functions are named similarly to the C functions and have the
letter 'x' prepended to the name, and they have the same prototype as
the C standard definition of the functions.

For example, the wrapper function for
.BR strcpy "(3)"
is \fIxstrcpy,\fP and the wrapper function for
.BR strcat "(3)"
is \fIxstrcat.\fP There is a complete list of these wrapper functions
in the \fICtalk Language Reference.\fP

These functions allow the
.B Ctalk
class libraries to use the standard prototypes of the C library
functions even when an operating system platform may substitute a
different parameter list for the functions - the wrappers contain the
OS specific details within the C portion of the
.B Ctalk
library.

For many OS platforms, either a C library function or its wrapper
function may be used interchangeably, but the wrapper functions help
insure that the class libraries remain compatible if an OS should
substitute its own version of a particular C library function.

.SS User Defined Templates

It's also possible to define and register templates for user- or
program-specific functions.  The
.BR templates "(5ctalk)"
manual page contains more information about the how to write templates
and how to register the templates with the class library.



.SH OVERVIEW OF THE C LANGUAGE API

Within a method's scope, there are four general ways that the method
might refer to objects.  They are:

.in +5
- The method's receiver; i.e.,
.B self.

- Global or local objects that are created with the \fInew\fP
method.

- Arguments to the method, which are referred to by the
parameters in the method's declaration.

- Objects whose value is another object.  The classes \fISymbol\fP and
\fIKey\fP (and any subclasses of them) are primarily responsible for
managing object references.

.in -5

The \fICtalk Language Reference\fP describes each of the functions and
macros used to manage objects in C, as well as the C language OBJECT
typedef.  For convenience, they are described here.

.TP 5
__ctalk_self_internal ()
.TP 5
__ctalk_self_internal_value ()
These return the object that is the receiver of the method, either
the parent object, or its \fIvalue\fP instance variable.
.TP 5
__ctalk_arg_internal (\fIn\fP)
Returns the \fInth\fP argument of the method.
.TP 5
ARG(\fIn\fP)
A macro that is shorthand for \fI__ctalk_arg_internal.\fP
.TP 5
__ctalkGetObject (\fIname, classname\fP)
Return object \fIname\fP in class \fIclassname.\fP  If
\fIclassname\fP is NULL, return the first object of any
class with that name.
.TP 5
INTVAL
.TP 5
LLVAL
.TP 5
BOOLVAL
.TP 5
SYMVAL
Macros that translate an object's value into its corresponding
C type.

All of the functions, and the SYMVAL macro, return a C OBJECT *.
Here is the definition of an OBJECT structure.

.in +5
struct _object {
.br
  int sig;
.br
  char __o_name[MAXLABEL];
.br
  char __o_classname[MAXLABEL];
.br
  OBJECT *__o_class;
.br
  char __o_superclassname[MAXLABEL];
.br
  OBJECT *__o_superclass;
.br
  OBJECT *__o_p_obj;
.br
  VARTAG *__o_vartags;
.br
  char *__o_value;
.br
  METHOD *instance_methods,
    *class_methods;
.br
  int scope;
.br
  int nrefs;
.br
  struct _object *classvars;
.br
  struct _object *instancevars;    
.br
  struct _object *next;
.br
  struct _object *prev;
.br
  int attrs;
.br
};
.in -5

Since it's important to be familiar with OBJECT *'s when working
in C, many of the following examples describe the OBJECT typedef's
members in detail.

.SH A METHOD WRITTEN IN C

This section describes C interface of the method above in detail.
Here it is again.

.in +5
Integer instanceMethod + add (Magnitude i) {
.br
  "Return the sum of the receiver and argument."
.br

  int a, result;
.br

  if (i is Integer) {
.br
    return INTVAL(__ctalk_self_internal_value () -> __o_value)
.br
      + INTVAL(ARG(0) -> __o_value);
.br
  } else {
.br
    a = i asInteger;
.br
    result = INTVAL(__ctalk_self_internal_value () -> __o_value)
.br
      + a;
.br
    return result;
.br
  }
.br
}
.in -5

The first line declares the method and its parameter list.

.in +5
Integer instanceMethod + add (Magnitude i) {
.in -5

The declaration begins with the method's member class, in this case
\fIInteger.\fP Following the member class name is the
\fIinstanceMethod\fP keyword, which indicates that the statement is
declaring an instance method in class \fIInteger.\fP If we were
declaring a class method, the \fIclassMethod\fP keyword would appear
here.

Following the \fIinstanceMethod\fP keyword is the name of the method.
The plus sign (+) declares that the method responds to the
mathematical addition sign (+) message wherever it appears.  The name
a method responds to is called its \fIselector.\fP Using a numeric
operator as the selector is optional, and necessary only when the
selector is composed of one or more non-label characters; that is, a
math operator.

In any case, the next field in the declaration, here the \fIadd\fP
label, is necessary when
.B Ctalk
translates the method into a C function to be compiled.  This
entry in the declaration must be a valid C label, which is
used when
.B Ctalk
translates the method into a C function to be compiled.
The section, 
.B TRANSLATING METHOD NAMES TO FUNCTION NAMES,
below, describes this in more detail.

Following the method name is the parameter list, enclosed in
parentheses.
.B Ctalk
allows method parameters to be declared like C parameters,
using C data types, or as objects preceded by their member
class name, in this case, "Magnitude i."

.B Ctalk
is not a strongly typed language, so it is flexible in what class a
parameter might be declared as.  Here the argument \fIi\fP is declared
as a member of class \fIMagnitude,\fP which is the superclass of any
class that represents a quantity; for example, \fIIntegers, Floats,
LongIntegers, Characters\fP and \fPStrings.\fP

As mentioned in the section,
.B HIGH LEVEL API,
above, this example should print a warning that the receiver's
class and parameter's class are not the same.  The compiler
will interpret the expressions as if the parameter were
the default class, \fIInteger,\fP and defer resolving the
actual numeric types until run time.

This allows the compiler to make sure that the methods used in
expressions are defined for the parameter.  In this case,
\fIMagnitude\fP class defines many methods that perform
conversions between classes, like the \fIasInteger\fP method,
which we'll get to in a moment.

The next line:

.in +5
  "Return the sum of the receiver and argument."
.in -5

is a string or comment that documents the method.  The text may be
enclosed by quotes, as in this example, or by the C comment delimiters
/* and */, or as a C++ type comment, where each line begins with a //
delimiter.  This allows methods to have a documentation string, and
also contain comments further on in the method, and which might only
be necessary for programmers, and which need not be included in the
method's documentation which is visible when browsing methods.

The next line,

.in +5
int a, result;
.in -5

simply declares some local C variables that the method uses.

After that, the line,

.in +5
if (i is Integer) {
.in -5

determines whether we can add the argument, \fIi,\fP directly
to the receiver, \fIself,\fP or whether we need to perform
a conversion of the argument to \fIInteger\fP class.  More
on that in a moment.

If the \fIif\fP statement above is true, then all we need to
do is add the values of the receiver and the argument.

.in +5
return INTVAL(__ctalk_self_internal_value () -> __o_value)
.br
  + INTVAL(ARG(0) -> __o_value);
.in -5

The reason we add the

.in +5
-> __o_value
.in -5

references after __ctalk_self_internal_value and ARG(0) is that both
of these return a complete object.  However, in these expressions,
we're interested only in their values as C types, which is what the
__o_value member stores.  The INTVAL macro simply assures that the
compiler treats __o_value members as a storage area for a C int.
(It's actually a cast to an int *.)

It's worth mentioning at this point why it's necessary to have two
functions, __ctalk_self_internal and __ctalk_self_internal_value.
The first, __ctalk_self_internal, returns the complete receiver
object.  This is necessary when the method works with a complete
object; for example, the method creates a reference to it in some
other object.

However, in this case, __ctalk_self_internal_value returns the
object's \fIvalue\fP instance variable.  All objects have a
\fIvalue\fP variable, which stores the object's actual value.

The class of the \fIvalue\fP instance variable always corresponds
to a C type in classes that translate directly to them; in this
case the class of the \fIvalue\fP variable will always be
\fIInteger.\fP

It is not necessarily the case that the parent object and the
\fIvalue\fP instance variable have the same class.  A common example
is any instance variable.  These use the class that they are members
of as the class of the parent object, while the class of the
variable's own \fIvalue\fP instance variable can be declared
separately.

.in +5

-----------------
.br
|               |
.br
| Parent Object |        The class is, for example, 
.br
|               |         "FileStream."
.br
-----------------
.br
        |
.br	
-----------------
.br
|    value      |
.br
|   instance    |        The class is, "Integer"
.br
|   variable    |
.br
-----------------
	

.in -5

So in cases where we want to use the value of an object in a C
expression, it is almost always the case that the expression needs to
use the \fIvalue\fP instance variable, whose member \fI__o_value\fP
contains the object's value.

Macros like \fIINTVAL\fP help translate the value into a C type.
Again, to return the value of an \fIInteger\fP receiver as a C int,
the method would use an expression like this one.

.in +5
INTVAL(__ctalk_self_internal_value () -> __o_value)
.in -5

Macros like INTVAL and LLVAL are basically typecast expressions that
tell the compiler to treat the object's __o_value member as a 
buffer for the object's corresponding C type.

Finally, the
.B Ctalk
compiler wraps the entire expression in function that creates an
object from our result and stores it internally if necessary.  In
cases where we want the function to return an \fIInteger\fP, that
function is __ctalkRegisterIntReturn.  This creates the OBJECT * that
is the type that all methods return.  The functions that return
objects that correspond to a C data type listed here.

.in +5
__ctalkRegisterBoolReturn
.br
__ctalkRegisterCharReturn
.br
__ctalkRegisterCharPtrReturn
.br
__ctalkRegisterFloatReturn
.br
__ctalkRegisterLongLongIntReturn
.in -5
 
Here, for completeness, is the fully translated statement.

.in +5
return __ctalkRegisterIntReturn
.br
   (INTVAL__ctalk_self_internal_value () -> __o_value)
.br
   + (INTVAL__ctalk_arg_value_internal (0) -> __o_value));
.in -5

.SH DEBUGGING

This section provides a brief overview of working with a
.B Ctalk
program when it's translated to C.

First, you need to prepare
.B Ctalk
and the programs it builds for debugging.  Refer to the section,
.B PREPARING PROGRAMS FOR DEBUGGING.

After compiling the program with
.B ctdb,
it's possible to use
.BR gdb "(1)"
to examine the program using the intermediate C output.
For example, here's a transcript
of a brief
.BR gdb "(1)"
session.

.in +5
$ gdb myprog
.br
(gdb) break main
.br
(gdb) r
.in -5

This stops the programs execution at the start of the function
\fImain,\fP and from there you can single step through each line of
the C output.

To break on a method, you need to use the C identifier of
that method as a breakpoint.  The next section,
.B TRANSLATING METHOD NAMES TO FUNCTION NAMES,
describes how
.B Ctalk
translates method declarations into C identifiers that a
C compiler can use.

For example, to break on the Integer : + method, you would
enter this.

.in +5
(gdb) break Integer_instance_add_1
.in -5

The functions in the
.B Ctalk
library API return data from
.B Ctalk's
internal stacks.  When debugging, you can examine that data
directly.

The function __ctalk_self_interal simply returns the most recent entry
that is pushed onto the __ctalk_receivers stack, which pushes the receiver
of each nested method call; You can examine the __ctalk_receivers
stack directly in
.BR gdb "(1)",
for example,

.in +5
(gdb) print __ctalk_receivers
.br
$2 = {0x0 <repeats 512 times>, 0x485e9948}
.in -5

Similarly, the __ctalk_arg_internal function returns the \fIn\fPth
most recent argument pushed onto the argument stack, __ctalk_argstack.

.in +5
(gdb) print __ctalk_argstack
.br
$3 = {0x0 <repeats 511 times>, 0x48691820, 0x48682df0}
.in -5

Objects declared in a global scope are kept in a list called
__ctalk_dictionary.  The lists that keep objects in any scope
are lists of VARENTRYs.  The VARENTRY type performs functions
like object aliasing, when objects are assigned to a different
identifier, and when iterating through the object's value, which
is valid in many agregate classes.

More importantly for us, it maintains pointers to the objects
that we want to examine.  For example, this transcript displays
a global object (the formatting is altered to make the transcript
more readable).

.in +5
(gdb) print __ctalk_dictionary
.br
$6 = (VARENTRY *) 0x485e5bf0
.br

(gdb) print *__ctalk_dictionary
.br
$7 = {sig = 10658466, var_decl = 0x485e5c20,
.br
var_object = 0x485e1b60, orig_object_rec = 0x0,
.br
i = 0xffffffff, i_post = 0xffffffff, i_temp = 0xffffffff, 
.br
del_cnt = 0, is_local = false, next = 0x485e2c00, prev = 0x0}
.br

(gdb) print *__ctalk_dictionary->var_object
.br
$8 = {sig = 13882323, __o_name = "digit0",'\000' <repeats 249 times>, 
.br
__o_classname = '\000' <repeats 255 times>, __o_class = 0x4857f820, 
.br
__o_superclassname = '\000' <repeats 255 times>,
.br
__o_superclass = 0x483ab648, 
.br
__o_p_obj = 0x0, __o_vartags = 0x485e2390,
.br
__o_value = 0x485e2370 "(null)", 
.br
instance_methods = 0x0, class_methods = 0x0, scope = 1, nrefs = 1, 
.br
classvars = 0x0, instancevars = 0x485e1f68, next = 0x0,
.br
prev = 0x0, attrs = 0}
.in -5

Examining a locally declared object is more involved.  Method and
function calls are maintained in a structure called the __call_stack,
maintains a set of RT_INFO structures, each of which contains either a
METHOD or RT_FN type depending on whether the call was to a method or
a function. In turn, each method and function maintains a list of
VARENTRY structures of the objects that have been declared within the
function or method's scope.  Here is a transcript of examining a local
object.


.in +5
(gdb) print __call_stack
.br
$20 =
.br
{0x0 <repeats 510 times>, 0x4867f5b8, 0x485f8ed8, 0x485ea898}


(gdb) print *__call_stack[510]
.br
$21 = {source_file = '\000' <repeats 4095 times>,
.br
rcvr_obj = 0x4867e578,
.br
rcvr_class_obj = 0x483ab648,
.br
method_class_obj = 0x0,
.br
method = 0x483af518, 
.br
method_fn = 0x8056763 <Array_instance_set_value_1>,
.br
_rt_fn = 0x0, classlib_read = false, inline_call = false,
.br
block_scope = false, rt_methd_ptr = 0, _arg_frame_top = 512,
.br
_block_frame_top = 0, _successive_call = 0,
.br
local_object_cache = {0x0 <repeats 512 times>}, 
.br
arg_active_tag = 0x0,
.br
arg_text = "500000L", '\000' <repeats 8184 times>, 
.br
local_obj_cache_ptr = 0}


(gdb) print *__call_stack[510]->method
.br
$22 = {sig = 15921906, name = "=", '\000' <repeats 254 times>, 
.br
selector = '\000' <repeats 255 times>, 
.br
returnclass = "Array", '\000' <repeats 250 times>,
.br
rcvr_class_obj = 0x483ab648, 
.br
cfunc = 0x8056763 <Array_instance_set_value_1>,
.br
src = 0x0,
.br
params = {0x483aa5e8, 0x0 <repeats 511 times>},
.br
n_params = 1, varargs = 0, prefix = 0, no_init = 0, 
.br
n_args = 1, primitive = 0, attrs = 0, error_line = 0,
.br
error_column = 0, arg_frame_top = 511, rcvr_frame_top = 0,
.br
imported = false, queued = false, 
.br
args = {0x486930d0, 0x0 <repeats 511 times>},
.br
local_objects = {{
.br
vars = 0x48690978, objs = 0x48690978}, {vars = 0x0, 
.br
objs = 0x0} <repeats 511 times>},
.br
nth_local_ptr = 0, user_objects = 0x0, 
.br
user_object_ptr = 0x0, n_user_objs = 0, local_cvars = 0x0, next = 0x483b1078, 
.br
prev = 0x483ad9b8}


(gdb) print *__call_stack[510]->method->local_objects.vars
.br
$23 = {sig = 10658466, var_decl = 0x486909a8, var_object = 0x48688330,
.br
orig_object_rec = 0x48688330, i = 0xffffffff, i_post = 0xffffffff, 
.br
i_temp = 0xffffffff, del_cnt = 0, is_local = false, next = 0x48690bb8, prev = 0x0}


(gdb)
.br
print *__call_stack[510]->method->local_objects.vars->var_object
.br

$24 = {sig = 13882323,
.br
__o_name = "argSize", '\000' <repeats 248 times>, 
.br
__o_classname = '\000' <repeats 255 times>, __o_class = 0x48258820, 
.br
__o_superclassname = '\000' <repeats 255 times>,
.br
__o_superclass = 0x4825bcb0, 
.br
__o_p_obj = 0x0, __o_vartags = 0x48675898,
.br
__o_value = 0x4868b8c8 "\t", 
.br
instance_methods = 0x0, class_methods = 0x0, scope = 2, nrefs = 1, 
.br
classvars = 0x0, instancevars = 0x4868e818, next = 0x0,
.br
prev = 0x0, attrs = 8388608, pad = '\000' <repeats 195 times>}
.in -5

In order to debug the
.B Ctalk
compiler, in cases where you want to check its code generation,
it's normally necessary to stop the compiler at a specific
function or method.  Refer to the section,
.B STOPPING THE COMPILER AT FUNCTIONS AND METHODS.

.SH TRANSLATING METHOD NAMES TO FUNCTION NAMES
When debugging, it's useful to know what a translated method's C
function name is.  The function that
.B Ctalk
creates has the name which is a combination of the class name,
the label \fIinstance\fP or \fIclass\fP, the method's name, and
the number of parameters the method declares.

These functions are output by the
.B Ctalk
compiler, and they are valid C function names, so that the C compiler
can translate the methods into an executable program.

So for example, a method declared like the following: 

.in +5
Integer instanceMethod + add (Magnitude i) ...
.in -5

generates this C label in the output.

.in +5
Integer_instance_add_1 
.in -5

A class method like this one,

.in +5
FileStream classMethod initClass (void)
.in -5

becomes this.

.in +5
FileStream_class_initClass_0
.in -5

Note that the generated functions always have a \fIvoid\fP parameter
list.  That's because, when
.B Ctalk
calls a method, it has already placed the arguments on the
__ctalk_argstack stack, where the function \fI__ctalk_arg_internal\fP
or the \fIARG(n)\fP macro can retrieve them.  

.B Ctalk
also needs to define whether a method is a prefix method, or whether
the method accepts a variable number of arguments.  It does this by
using a \fIp\fP or \fIv\fP, respectively.

So this method, which is equivalent to the operator in a C
expression like this one:

.in +5
++myInt;
.in -5

must use the \fI__prefix__\fP keyword as its argument list,

.in +5
Integer instanceMethod ++ increment (__prefix__)
.in -5

and it generates this declaration in the output.

.in +5
Integer_instance_increment_p (void)
.in -5

Similarly, a method with an ellipsis as its parameter list,
like this one,

.in +5
String instanceMethod printOn (...)
.in -5

becomes this is the output

.in +5
String_instance_printOn_v (void)
.in -5

.SH PREPARING PROGRAMS FOR DEBUGGING

To debug a method at the C level, it's first necessary to build the
program with its intermediate C output, so debuggers like
.BR gdb "(1)"
can use the line information of the C file.  The program
.BR ctdb "(1)"
provides the option \fI-k\fP to retain the C intermediate
file.  This is the basic form of using
.BR ctdb "(1)"
to build a debugging version of the program.

.in +5
$ ctdb -k myprog.ca -o myprog
.in -5

Incidentally, if you plan to examine the internals of
.B Ctalk
itself, it is practically necessary to turn off optimization
when building
.B Ctalk.
This allows the source code and the machine code to maintain
a one-to-one correspondence; optimization, on the other hand,
re-arranges the output and can make debugging with a source
level debugger like
.BR gdb "(1)"
difficult or even impossible.

To do this, configure and build
.B Ctalk
with the --without-optimization option:

.in +5
$ ./configure --without-optimization
.in -5


Refer to the documentation in the
.B Ctalk
source code distribution for more information.  

.SH STOPPING THE COMPILER AT FUNCTIONS AND METHODS

When debugging the
.B Ctalk
compiler, it's often necessary to set a breakpoint when the compiler
begins to compile a specifc function or method.  To do this, open
the file \fIinclude/break.h\fP in a text editor, then uncomment and
edit one of the following definitons.

.TP 5
.B METHOD_BREAK
Break when beginning to compile the method defined here.  It's
necessary to use the method's C name as the definition.  Refer
to
.B TRANSLATING METHOD NAMES TO FUNCTION NAMES,
above.
.TP 5
.B MAIN_BREAK
Break when beginning to compile the function \fImain.\fP
.TP 5
.B FUNCTION_BREAK
Break at the function that this macro is defined to.

In the case of
.B METHOD_BREAK
and
.B FUNCTION_BREAK,
you need to edit the definitions to the name of the
function or method, enclosed in quotes.  For example:

.in +5
#define METHOD_BREAK "Integer_instance_add_1"

or

#define FUNCTION_BREAK "myFunc"
.in -5

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctalk 
is written and maintained by Robert Kiesling,
.br
rk3314042@gmail.com.  The
.B Ctalk
Web site is at
.br
http://sourceforge.net/projects/ctalk/.

