.\" $Id: ctcc.1,v 1.1.1.1 2020/05/16 02:37:00 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of Ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2005-2012 Robert Kiesling, rkiesling@users.sourceforge.net.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

.TH CTCC 1 "2014-03-13"
.SH NAME
ctcc \- Compile Ctalk programs.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ctcc
[
.B -h
] | [
.B -c
] [
.B --clearpreload
] [
.B -I \fIdir\fP
] [
.B -k
] [
.B -m
] [
.B --nopreload
] [
.B --progress
] [
.B -x
] [
.B -o \fIoutput_file\fP
]
.B \fIinput_files\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Ctcc
compiles Ctalk executable programs from one or more Ctalk
input files.  If the 
.B -o
option is not given, the name of the resulting executable
program is 
.I ctalk.out.

The Texinfo manual, \fICtalk Language Reference,\fP and the 
.BR ctalk "(1)"
manual page describe all of the Ctalk command line options.

If you need to compile a program for debugging, 
.B ctdb 
compiles Ctalk executables so they can be examined with
.B gdb.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -c
Compile the input file only; don't link the \fI.o\fP output file.
.TP 8
.B --clearpreload
Add 
.B --clearpreload
to Ctalk's options.  The option clears the preloaded method cache.
If given with no other options, clear the preloaded methods and 
exit.
.TP 8
.B -h
Print a help message and exit.

.TP 8
.B -I \fIdir\fP
Add directory to Ctalk search path.

.TP 8
.B -k
Keep temporary files.

.TP 8
.B -m
Link program with
.B libm
by adding
.B -lm 
to the linker flags.

.TP 8
.B --nopreload
Add
.B --nopreload 
to Ctalk's options.  Do not use preloaded methods, and do not
write methods to the preloaded method cache.

.TP 8
.B --progress
Add 
.B --progress
to Ctalk's options.  Display Ctalk's progress by printing 
dots on the screen.

.TP 8
.B -o \fIoutput_file\fP
Name the executable \fIoutput_file.\fP  If this option is
not given, the default output file name is \fIctalk.out.\fP

.TP 8
.B -x
Link with X Window System libraries by adding 
.B -lX11 -lXext
to the linker flags.  The option also adds a generic 
directory path to search for the libraries.  If LD_LIBRARY_PATH is set
in the environment, then that path is used to search for all
libraries.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B Ctpp,
like
.B Ctalk,
uses the value of \fICLASSLIBDIRS\fP to add additional directories to
its class search path.  \fICLASSLIBDIRS's\fP value is a colon
separated list of directories to search; i.e., 
\fI<dir1>\fP:\fI<dir2>\fP:\fI<dir3>.\fP

.B Ctcc
also uses the values of \fICFLAGS,\fP \fILDFLAGS,\fP and 
\fICTFLAGS\fP if they are set in the environment.  In that case,
.B ctcc
prepends their values to the options for the compiler, the linker, and 
.B Ctalk.


.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gcc "(1)",
.BR cpp "(1)"
.BR ctalk "(1)",
.BR ctpp "(1)",
.BR ctdb "(1)",
.BR gdb "(1)".

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctpp 
is written and maintained by Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.

