.\" $Id: ctxlogo.1,v 1.1.1.1 2020/05/16 02:37:00 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2014 Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

.TH CTXLOGO 1 "2014-05-12"
.SH NAME
ctxlogo \- A Ctalk demonstration program for X desktops.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ctxlogo
[
.B -h | --help
] | [
.B -fg \fIfgcolor\fP
] [
.B -bg \fIbgcolor\fP
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Ctxlogo
is a small Ctalk demonstration program for the X Window	System.  It
displays a Ctalk logo over the X Window System logo.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -bg \fIcolor\fP
Set the window background to \fIcolor.\fP
.TP 8
.B -fg \fIcolor\fP
Set the window foreground to \fIcolor.\fP
.TP 8
.B -h
Display a help message and exit.  
.TP 8
.B --help
The same as 
.B -h.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ctalk "(1)"

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctalk 
and
.B ctxlogo
are written and maintained by Robert Kiesling,
.br
rk3314042@gmail.com.
