.\" $Id: membervars.1,v 1.1.1.1 2019/10/26 23:40:51 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2015 Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

.TH MEMBERVARS 1 "2015-09-16"
.SH NAME
membervars \- Display a Ctalk class's instance and class variables.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B membervars 
[
.B -h
] | [
.B \fIclassname\fP
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Membervars
displays the instance and class variables declared in the class
given as the argument.  When the declaration includes optional
elements,
.B membervars
includes those elements also.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -h
Print a help message and exit.


.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B Membervars,
like
.B Ctalk,
uses the value of 
.B CLASSLIBDIRS
to add additional directories to
its class search path.  
.B CLASSLIBDIRS's
value is a colon
separated list of directories; i.e., 
\fI<dir1>\fP:\fI<dir2>\fP:\fI<dir3>.\fP

.SH BUGS
To make the program as fast as possible,
.B membervars
only recognizes declarations that appear on a single line, except for
the variable's documentation string. If the declaration contains a
documentation string, then
.B membervars
includes the variable's documentation even if it spans multiple lines.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ctalk "(1)",
.BR classdoc "(1)",
.BR classes "(1)",
.BR methods "(1)",
.BR methodsource "(1)".

The Texinfo documentation also describes the
.B Ctalk
tools.  The shell command

  $ info ctalktools

displays the documentation on machines that have
GNU Texinfo installed.

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctalk 
and
.B methodsource
are written and maintained by Robert Kiesling,
.br
rk3314042@gmail.com.   The Web site
http://sf.net/projects/ctalk
contains information about current releases.

