.\" $Id: methods.1,v 1.1.1.1 2020/05/16 02:37:00 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2014-2016 Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

.TH METHODS 1 "2016-07-11"
.SH NAME
methods \- List the methods of a Ctalk class.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B methods
[
.B -h | --help
] | [
.B -c
] [
.B -d
] [
.B -i
] [
.B -p
] \fIclassname\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Methods
lists the methods of a Ctalk class, and optionally their prototypes
and documentation.

.B Methods 
uses the Object class's method, "methods," to perform a pattern search
on the class's library file for method names.  The program can display
either a list of the classes' method selectors, or the classes' method
prototypes, or the methods' documentation, or both.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -b
Print a brief listing of the method names (the default).
.TP 8
.B -c
List class methods.  
.TP 8
.B -d
Print the method's documentation.  The text of the documentation is
contained in the method body directly after the opening brace and can
be formatted as either C or C++ style comments, or a string enclosed
in double quotes.  Refer to the \fICtalk Language Reference\fP for
details.
.TP 8
.B -h
Display a help message and exit.  Also lists the directories that
Ctalk searches for its class libraries.
.TP 8
.B --help
The same as 
.B -h.
.TP 8
.B -i
List instance methods (the default).
.TP 8
.B -p
Print the method's argument list and return class if it is declared
with a "returnObjectClass" keyword. 

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B Methods, 
like
.B Ctalk,
uses the value of 
.B CLASSLIBDIRS
to add additional directories to
its class search path.  
.B CLASSLIBDIRS's
value is a colon
separated list of directories; i.e., 
\fI<dir1>\fP:\fI<dir2>\fP:\fI<dir3>.\fP

.SH BUGS
Commented out methods can sometimes fool the program, as can nested
double quotes in documentation strings.  The program also does not
skip methods that are enclosed in "#if 0 ... #endif" directives.

Also, 
.B methods
use the Application : methodSource method to retrieve a method's
source code.  Prototypes in documentation strings can fool Application
: methodSource into thinking a new method starts there, so the program
retrieves only part of the method's source code.

To prevent partial source code listings, instead of writing this in a
documentation string:

.RS 4
"The prototype is:
.br
Array instanceMethod <my-method-name> "
.RE

Write something like this:

.RS 4
"The prototype is:
.br
<Array-class-object> instanceMethod <my-method-name> "
.RE

The second example won't be mistaken for a method declaration.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR classdoc "(1)",
.BR classes "(1)",
.BR ctalk "(1)",
.BR methods "(1)",
.BR methodsource "(1)".

The Texinfo documentation also describes the
.B Ctalk
tools.  The shell command

  $ info ctalktools

displays the documentation on machines that have
GNU Texinfo installed.

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctalk 
and
.B methods
are written and maintained by Robert Kiesling,
.br
rk3314042@gmail.com.   The Web site
http://sf.net/projects/ctalk
contains information about current releases.

