.\" $Id: searchlib.1,v 1.1.1.1 2019/10/26 23:40:51 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2015 Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

.TH SEARCHLIB 1 "2016-09-25"
.SH NAME
searchlib \- Search the Ctalk library documentation.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B searchlib 
[
.B -h
] | [
.B -f \fIdocfile\fP
] | [
.B -m
]
\fIsearchpattern\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Searclib
searches the 
.B Ctalk
documentation for the application programming interface
functions or methods that match the search pattern given on the
command line, and displays the results along with the description
of each function or method.

The default is to search for a C library function.  
If the
.B -m
option is given,
.B searchlib
searches the class library documentation for matches to
any of the methods' prototypes (see below).


.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -f \fIpath\fP
The path to the library's API documentation.  In a normal
.B Ctalk
installation, this is \fI<prefix>/share/ctalk/libdoc,\fP and
\fI<prefix>/share/ctalk/classlibdoc.\fP
.TP 8
.B -h
Print a help message and exit.
.TP 8
.B -m
Search the class library for a method.  The class library
documentation is formatted so that all of a method's prototype
may be searched for a string or regular expression.  The
format of a method prototype in the documentation is:

  <receiver_class>::<method_selector> (<argument_list>)


.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ctalk "(1)",
.BR classes "(1)",
.BR membervars "(1)",
.BR methods "(1)",
.BR methodsource "(1)".

The Texinfo documentation also describes the
.B Ctalk
tools.  The shell command

  $ info ctalktools

displays the documentation on machines that have
GNU Texinfo installed.

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctalk 
and
.B searchlib
are written and maintained by Robert Kiesling,
.br
rk3314042@gmail.com.   The Web site
http://sf.net/projects/ctalk
contains information about current releases.

