.\" $Id: template.1,v 1.1.1.1 2020/05/16 02:37:00 rkiesling Exp $
.\"
.\" This file is part of ctalk.
.\" Copyright © 2015 Robert Kiesling, rk3314042@gmail.com.
.\" Permission is granted to copy this software provided that this copyright
.\" notice is included in all source code modules.
.\" 
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
.\" Inc., 51 Franklin St., Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

.TH TEMPLATE 1 "2016-03-15"
.SH NAME
template \- Add a Ctalk Template Method to a User's Template Library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B template -c
| 
.B -r
|
\fIactual_name\fP \fIapi_name\fP \fItemplate_file\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Template
is a simple utility that adds a template file to a user's local
template library and registers the template so that the
.B Ctalk
compiler can refer to it whenever the compiler encounters the
template's function name.

For a description of a template method's format, refer to the
.BR templates "(5ctalk)"
manual page.

The
.B template
program takes three arguments: the name of the template's function after
preprocessing, the template function's name in the application programming
interface, and the file name of the template to be added.  

In most cases, the \fIactual_name\fP and \fIapi_name\fP arguments are
the same.  For example, to add a template for the function
.B myPrintMsg,
contained in the file \fImyprintmsg.tmpl,\fP you would use a
command like this.

  template myPrintMsg myPrintMsg myprintmsg.tmpl

The separate \fIactual_name\fP argument is necessary in cases where a
function name is actually a macro definition. In that case, the
function name that appears in the source code after preprocessing may
not be the same as the function's API name.

For example, on Linux systems, the function
.BR getc "(3)"
is a macro definition for the actual function
.B _IO_getc,
which is the identifier that appears in the source file after
preprocessing.  In that case, a command to register a template
for
.BR getc "(3)"
might look something like this.

  template _IO_getc getc getc.tmpl

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -c
Create a new \fIfnnames\fP registry file if it doesn't exist.
.B Template
normally creates the \fIfnnames\fP file if it doesn't find one,
but this option also creates an empty \fIfnnames\fP file without adding
a template.  For example:

  template -c
  
.TP 8
.B -r
Replace an existing template registry, \fIfnnames,\fP with a new, empty
registry. The contents of the old file, if any, are not
preserved.  To replace an existing template registry, use the following
command.

  template -r

.SH BUGS
Probably a few.
.B Template,
like
.B Ctalk
and any other language that uses a C preprocessor, has a very limited
idea of a template definition's format, as well as the format of the
template registry.  For a description of a template definition's
format, refer to the
.BR template "(5ctalk)"
manual page, and the \fITemplate\fP section of the \fICtalk Language
Reference.\fP

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ctalk "(1)",
.BR fnnames "(5ctalk)",
.BR templates "(5ctalk)".

.SH AUTHORS
.B Ctalk
and
.B template
are written and maintained by Robert Kiesling,
.br
rk3314042@gmail.com.



